README.md, before:

SEW
===
**__Current Version: 1.0.0__**
Release date: April 24, 2019

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/Genomicsplc/SEW.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/Genomicsplc/SEW)

Changes in latest version

1. Initial release

For details of past changes please see [CHANGELOG](CHANGELOG.md).

SEW is an R program for reference panel free, long read phasing. SEW runs on a single sample given sequencing reads in BAM format, as well as a list of positions to phase, and outputs imputed genotypes in VCF format.

## Installation and quick start on real data example

### Quick start on Linux and Mac

bioconda installation forthcoming. Otherwise, SEW can be installed in a few ways. The simplest way to get a release is as follows. First, install R. Then, do the following 
```
git clone --recursive https://github.com/Genomicsplc/SEW.git
cd SEW
./scripts/install-dependencies.sh
mkdir -p releases && cd releases
wget https://github.com/Genomicsplc/sew/releases/download/1.0.0/SEW_1.0.0.tar.gz ## or curl -O
R CMD INSTALL SEW_1.0.0.tar.gz
```

A quick test (using simulated data) can be performed using 
```
wget https://www.well.ox.ac.uk/~rwdavies/ancillary/SEW_example_2019_01_11.tgz ## or curl -O
tar -xzvf SEW_example_2019_01_11.tgz
./SEW.R --chr=10 --bamlist=bamlist.txt --posfile=posfile.txt --phasefile=phasefile.txt --outputdir=./
```

To install the latest development code in the repository, use `./scripts/build-and-install.sh`. To install alternative releases, download the releases from Github, and install using `R CMD INSTALL` or similar.

If you encounter problems during installation, please consult the [STITCH](https://github.com/rwdavies/STITCH) website, or raise an issue.

A bioconda installation is forthcoming. Installation details will appear here when this is available.

## Help, command line interface and common options

For a full list of options, in R, query `?SEW`, or from the command line, `SEW --help`. For a brief writeup of commonly used variables, see [Options.md](Options.md). To pass vectors using the command line, do something like `SEW.R --unwindwIterations='c(30,60)'`.

## License

Copyright 2019, Genomics plc

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

## About heuristics

SEW features an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm that iteratively tries to 1) determine the best parameters of the model given probabilistic read partitions and 2) probabilistically partition reads into two haplotypes given parameters of the model. The EM algorithm is excellent at finding local minima, but relies on initial parameter estimates, and will have difficulty getting to global maxima.

To help overcome this, SEW uses a heuristic. More detail is available in the paper, but briefly, these local, but not global, maxima often reflect where there is good local reconstruction of the two haplotypse, but there is a switchover at some point between the estiamted computational haplotypes and the true haplotypes. The heuristic will, on specified iterations (`unwindIterations`), check between every pair of SNPs, whether flipping the computational haplotypes at the second SNP and beyond and running the EM algorithm for a few iterations will improve the local fit of the model versus the current configuration.

The current heuristics were developed for use with high coverage long read data. Different depths or length of reads might work best with alternative heuristic settings. For advice, please feel free to open an issue or send an email. 

## Testing

Tests in SEW are split into unit or acceptance run using ```./scripts/test-unit.sh``` and ```./scripts/test-acceptance.sh```. To run all tests use ```./scripts/all-tests.sh```, which also builds and installs a release version of SEW. To make compilation go faster do something like ```export MAKE="make -j 8"```.

## Citation

Bowden, R., Davies R. W., Heger A., Pagnamenta A. T., de Cesare M., Oikkonen L. E. et al. Sequencing of human genomes with nanopore technology. Nat. Commun 10, 1869 (2019).

## Contact and bug reports

The best way to report bugs or to get help is to open an issue on Github. Alternatively, for more detail questions or other concerns please contact Robert Davies robertwilliamdavies@gmail.com

Commit message:

Clarify language around bioconda. Working now through bioconda, needs a few days to wind through

README.md, after:

SEW
===
**__Current Version: 1.0.0__**
Release date: April 24, 2019

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/Genomicsplc/SEW.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/Genomicsplc/SEW)

Changes in latest version

1. Initial release

For details of past changes please see [CHANGELOG](CHANGELOG.md).

SEW is an R program for reference panel free, long read phasing. SEW runs on a single sample given sequencing reads in BAM format, as well as a list of positions to phase, and outputs imputed genotypes in VCF format.

## Installation and quick start on real data example

### Quick start on Linux and Mac

A bioconda installation is being prepared. Otherwise, SEW can be installed in a few ways. The simplest way to get a release is as follows. First, install R. Then, do the following 
```
git clone --recursive https://github.com/Genomicsplc/SEW.git
cd SEW
./scripts/install-dependencies.sh
mkdir -p releases && cd releases
wget https://github.com/Genomicsplc/sew/releases/download/1.0.0/SEW_1.0.0.tar.gz ## or curl -O
R CMD INSTALL SEW_1.0.0.tar.gz
```

A quick test (using simulated data) can be performed using 
```
wget https://www.well.ox.ac.uk/~rwdavies/ancillary/SEW_example_2019_01_11.tgz ## or curl -O
tar -xzvf SEW_example_2019_01_11.tgz
./SEW.R --chr=10 --bamlist=bamlist.txt --posfile=posfile.txt --phasefile=phasefile.txt --outputdir=./
```

To install the latest development code in the repository, use `./scripts/build-and-install.sh`. To install alternative releases, download the releases from Github, and install using `R CMD INSTALL` or similar.

If you encounter problems during installation, please consult the [STITCH](https://github.com/rwdavies/STITCH) website, or raise an issue.

A bioconda installation is being prepared and should be available in a few days. Installation details will appear here when this is available.

## Help, command line interface and common options

For a full list of options, in R, query `?SEW`, or from the command line, `SEW --help`. For a brief writeup of commonly used variables, see [Options.md](Options.md). To pass vectors using the command line, do something like `SEW.R --unwindwIterations='c(30,60)'`.

## License

Copyright 2019, Genomics plc

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

## About heuristics

SEW features an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm that iteratively tries to 1) determine the best parameters of the model given probabilistic read partitions and 2) probabilistically partition reads into two haplotypes given parameters of the model. The EM algorithm is excellent at finding local minima, but relies on initial parameter estimates, and will have difficulty getting to global maxima.

To help overcome this, SEW uses a heuristic. More detail is available in the paper, but briefly, these local, but not global, maxima often reflect where there is good local reconstruction of the two haplotypse, but there is a switchover at some point between the estiamted computational haplotypes and the true haplotypes. The heuristic will, on specified iterations (`unwindIterations`), check between every pair of SNPs, whether flipping the computational haplotypes at the second SNP and beyond and running the EM algorithm for a few iterations will improve the local fit of the model versus the current configuration.

The current heuristics were developed for use with high coverage long read data. Different depths or length of reads might work best with alternative heuristic settings. For advice, please feel free to open an issue or send an email. 

## Testing

Tests in SEW are split into unit or acceptance run using ```./scripts/test-unit.sh``` and ```./scripts/test-acceptance.sh```. To run all tests use ```./scripts/all-tests.sh```, which also builds and installs a release version of SEW. To make compilation go faster do something like ```export MAKE="make -j 8"```.

## Citation

Bowden, R., Davies R. W., Heger A., Pagnamenta A. T., de Cesare M., Oikkonen L. E. et al. Sequencing of human genomes with nanopore technology. Nat. Commun 10, 1869 (2019).

## Contact and bug reports

The best way to report bugs or to get help is to open an issue on Github. Alternatively, for more detail questions or other concerns please contact Robert Davies robertwilliamdavies@gmail.com
